# Incubus vs Taylor Swift

*Incubus vs Taylor Swift* is a machine learning script I created to check whether a song lyric is either from Incubus
or Taylor Swift. This was my first attempt at creating a machine learning script.

## Why Incubus vs Taylor Swift?

Why not? I love Incubus, and it is one of my all-time favorite bands. That doesn't mean I dislike Taylor Swift, but I do
think their style is different, so I made this script to see if there's indeed a difference between the two of them by
using their lyrics as a differentiation point.

## Installation

Check the `requierements.txt` file for the specific requirements.

In short, it requires the libraries `numpy`, `scipy`, `nltk`, `joblib`,
and `scikit-learn`.

## Inspiration

This project was built when following a lesson from [The Lazy Programmer](https://github.com/lazyprogrammer), from the
course Machine Learning: Natural Language Processing in Python (V2).

## Usage

```bash
python main.py
```

## Dataset

I created the lyrics datasets by myself, downloading the songs from different sources and cleaning up useless data.

The training dataset `data/lyrics_dataset.csv` includes 227 songs:

- 118 from Incubus
- 119 from Taylor Swift

### Testing dataset

The testing dataset is divided in two, one test for original songs from Incubus and Taylor Swift, and another test for
songs generated by OpenAI GPT4.
None of the songs in the test datasets are present in the training dataset.

#### Testing with original songs

The file `data/lyrics_dataset_test.csv` includes:

- 15 songs from Incubus
- 15 songs from Taylor Swift

The file `data/lyrics_dataset_test_chatgpt.csv` includes:

- 5 songs from OpenAI GPT4 in the style and format of Incubus
- 5 songs from OpenAI GPT4 in the style and format of Taylor Swift

### Accuracy

The highest accuracy I could obtain using the first test of 30 songs was 90%.
Meaning, about nine songs out of ten are correctly classified as being from the right artist,
either Incubus or Taylor Swift.

The highest accuracy I could obtain using the ten songs from OpenAI GPT4 was 50%.
In more detail, I noticed that all songs that were from Incubus were wrongly classified as being from Taylor Swift.

### Training the model

The script trains a model by trying a bunch of hyperparameters, after making many tests using different types of
algorithms; I found the highest score of accuracy (97%) on my training data with RandomForestClassifier from sklearn.
The hyperparameters used to get the highest score are in the code itself, so you can check them out if you want to.

### Replicating the results

Since I am providing the code, the trained model and the datasets, you can easily replicate the results.

## The model

The trained model (vectorizer and classifier) is included here in the `model` folder.

### Finetuning the hyperparameters
If you wish to test your own hyperparameters, you need to delete the `.joblib` files in the `model` folder
and run the script.
After running the script for the first time, it will create a file to save the vectorizer and the classifier 
in two separate `.joblib` files in the folder `model`. 
The first time the script runs, it will be slow. 
Next time you run the script, the script will load the saved model and vectorizer to run the tests, so it will be way
faster.

## Contributing

Pull requests are welcome. For major changes, please open an issue first
to discuss what you would like to change.

## License

[MIT](https://choosealicense.com/licenses/mit/)